Data Deletion Request Handing spec (#6)
InteractiveAdvertisingBureau/USPrivacy: CCPA/Data Deletion Request Handling.md

# Data Deletion Request Handling

## Summary

This specification provides a way for a publisher to communicate to downstream parties via a webpage about a consumer's request to delete their data. 

In particular, Section 1798.105(c) of the California Consumer Protection Act (CCPA) states that "[a] business that receives a verifiable consumer request from a consumer to delete the consumer's personal information [shall] . . direct any service providers to delete the consumer's personal information from their records." 

> In response to this directive in the CCPA, this specification offers the technical means for publishers to communicate deletion requests to their service providers. All service providers covered by IAB Privacy LLC's Limited Service Provider Agreement (LSPA) and any other providers who receive the signal for deletion requests are then enabled and obliged to comply and delete the specified consumer data.

Author: remove "and obliged" (comment from TL counsel)

While this specification provides the technical means for compliance in cases where CCPA applies, implementations may exist to support deletion requests outside CCPA governance. 

### Relevant Documents

[Limited Service Provider Agreement](https://www.iabprivacy.com/lspa-2019-12.pdf) (12-2-19 version)

## How it Works

Any ad tech company (vendor) supporting the US Privacy framework, exposes a JavaScript resource for each service they offer. The vendor hosts a URL that provides this resource and also serves as a unique identifier for the resource. The URL is made public to a maintained LSPA signatories list and to non-signatories based on the vendor's documented practices.

Publishers working with any services provided by these vendors consume the exposed JavaScript and embed it on their properties where consumers can request deletion of their personal data. If data deletion is requested, all javascript signals on the publisher property are sent to the associated vendors. Vendors then respond by deleting the relevant personal data and signaling any affected vendors downstream.

> 

Reviewer: "...and signaling any affected vendors downstream."
I thought we were agreed that this was a one-level delete and not some kind of recursive fan out. Consider removing?

### Multiple Services

For vendors that provide multiple services, a URL is provided for each service. A publisher may use any of those services but not necessarily all of them. When a consumer requests data deletion, only the scripts provided on the page will trigger the delete request back to the vendor. Vendors can then delete the personal data, in accordance with their practices, for each service provided on the publisher property where the request originated.

### Deletion

> The technical solution detailed in this specification provides the means to signal consumer requests for data deletion. Companies supporting the US Privacy Framework will respond to the signals by deleting the consumer's relevant personal data. The process for deletion depends on the company's technology and operational practices in place. _How_ a vendor deletes a consumer's personal data is out of scope for this specification.

Author: Change to read:

> The technical solution detailed in this specification provides the means to signal consumer requests for data deletion. Companies supporting the US Privacy Framework **(i.e., service providers)** will respond to the signals by deleting the consumer's relevant personal data to the extent required by CCPA. The process for deletion depends on the company's technology and operational practices in place. How a vendor deletes a consumer's personal data is out of scope for this specification.

bolded text is new

### Non-web Environments

If the consumer initiates a data deletion request from a non-web environment, the request can be propagated through the same javascript resource described above by directing the user to a publisher webpage to complete the deletion request. The request can be associated to the device from where it originated using defined parameters.

## Deletion Signaling

> Deletion signaling uses two commands: `registerDeletion` and `performDeletion`. The first command, `registerDeletion`, is executed when the publisher loads script on a given page or property. This informs the vendor that the provided script has been loaded. The second command, `performDeletion`, is executed if a consumer requests data deletion and informs the vendor that a consumer has requested that their private data be deleted.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deletion signaling uses two commands: `registerDeletion` and `performDeletion`. The first command, `registerDeletion`, is executed when the publisher loads a vendor script on a given page or property. This registers the vendor script to receive the signal sent by the `performDeletion` call. The second command, `performDeletion`, is executed if a consumer requests data deletion and signals the vendor that a consumer has requested that their personal data be deleted.  
```

Not sure about the first sentence change but I am fairly sure that the call to registerDeletion does not signal the vendor in any way. Or at least, does not _need_ to signal anything to the vendor.

Reviewer 2: @lon-pilot-mpf thanks for the edits! Proposing some further improvements for readability:

"is executed when the publisher loads a vendor script on a given page or property"
->
"is executed by the vendor script when the publisher loads it on a given page or property"

"The second command, `performDeletion`, is executed"
->
"The second command, `performDeletion`, is executed by the publisher"

### Sample Workflow
1. Publisher loads scripts provided by vendors. 
2. The vendors' scripts execute `registerDeletion` at load.
3. When a data deletion request is made by the user on the page, the publisher executes `performDeletion`, which executes all vendors' deletion scripts that have been registered with` registerDeletion.`
4. Vendors perform deletion asynchronously, in accordance with their technology and operational practices. 

### How should publishers load vendor scripts?

Vendors need access to the publisher domain to get a user identifier to associate with a delete request. In order for vendors to do so, the vendor scripts described in this specification must be loaded _directly _on the publisher domain normally used for collecting data and serving ads and not on a separate or generic domain. For safety, the vendor scripts can be loaded in an iframe, provided the following conditions are met:
*   The iframe is hosted on the publisher domain
*   If the iframe sandbox parameter is provided, the following restrictions are lifted:
    *   `allow-scripts`
    *   `allow-storage-access-by-user-activation`

## registerDeletion

> This command registers a vendor-specific callback function at the API. When the publisher loads the vendor deletion script, it must execute `registerDeletion`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command registers a vendor-specific callback function at the API. When the publisher loads the vendor deletion script, those scripts must execute `registerDeletion`. 
```

> The `registerDeletion` command uses the following syntax: 

Reviewer: Change in line with the performDeletion text below.
```suggestion
This command is an update to the existing `__uspapi` function with the following syntax: 
```

```
__usapi("registerDeletion", version, performDeletionFunction)
```

> Upon execution, the vendor is notified that the vendor's deletion script was loaded.

Reviewer: Not sure this is true; see my earlier comment. Maybe rephrase to:
```suggestion
Upon execution, the vendor script is registered to receive the signal sent by the call to `performDeletion`.
```

## performDeletion

> The publisher, or its CMP where applicable, calls this command on some user delete action to initiate the deletion process. The command communicates to vendors that a specified user has requested that their personal data be deleted. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The publisher, or its CMP where applicable, calls this command based on some user delete action to initiate the deletion process. The command communicates to vendors that a specified user has requested that their personal data be deleted by calling the `performDeletionFunction` registered during the call to `registerDeletion`. 
```

> This command is an update to existing  `__uspapi`. The `performDeletion` command uses the following syntax: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command is an update to the existing `__uspapi` function with the following syntax: 
```

## Example Implementation

Publisher site setup:

```
<html>
  <head>
    <script>
      //API provided by the publisher or CMP:
      function uspapi_addFrame()
      {
       if(!window.frames['__uspapiLocator'])
       {
        if(document.body)
        {
         var i = document.createElement('iframe');
         i.style.cssText = 'display:none';
         i.name = '__uspapiLocator';
         document.body.appendChild(i);
        }
        else
        {
         window.setTimeout('uspapi_addFrame()', 10);
        }
       }
      }
      
      function uspapi_stub()
      {
       var b = arguments;
       __uspapi.a = __uspapi.a || [];
       if(!b.length)
       {
        return __uspapi.a;
       }
       else
       {
        __uspapi.a.push([].slice.apply(b));
       }
      }
      
      function uspapi_msghandler(event)
      {
       var msgIsString = typeof event.data === 'string';
       try
       {
        var json = msgIsString ? JSON.parse(event.data) : event.data;
       }
       catch(e)
       {
        var json = null;
       }
       if(typeof (json) === 'object' && json !== null && '__uspapiCall' in json)
       {
        var i = json.__uspapiCall;

>         window.__uspapi(i.command, i.version, function (retValue, success) 

Reviewer: Does this need the extra optional parameter ('identifiers') used in non-web contexts as a placeholder?

Reviewer 3: yes, probably

Author: can you show exactly where that would go?

Reviewer 4: No it doesn't.  Param is the last value and it's optional, so no need to pass it unless it is defined.

Reviewer: It's already there I think. I may have missed it in my original comment or it may have been added (not honestly sure which). It's on line 229 below.

       if(window.addEventListener)
       {
        window.addEventListener('message', uspapi_msghandler, false);
       }
       else
       {
        window.attachEvent('onmessage', uspapi_msghandler);
       }
      }
    </script>
    <!-- include the vendor deletion scripts into the page: -->
    <script src="https://vendorx.com/ccpa-delete-function.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <button id="ccpa-delete">Delete my personal data</button>
    <script>
      document.getElementById('ccpa-delete').addEventListener('click', function ()
      {
       __uspapi('performDeletion', 1, null);
      }, false);
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Vendor script (at `https://vendorx.com/ccpa-delete-function.js`)

```
// find the __uspapi frame
var f = window;
var cmpFrame;
var cmpCallbacks = {};
while (!cmpFrame) {
  try {
    if (f.frames['__uspapiLocator']) {
      cmpFrame = f;
    }
  } catch (e) {}
  if (f === window.top) {
    break;
  }
  f = f.parent;
}

/* Set up a __uspapi function to do the postMessage and
stash the callback.
This function behaves (from the caller's perspective)
identically to the in-frame __uspapi call */

> window.__uspapi = function(cmd, ver, callback, param) {

Reviewer: This has always somewhat confused me, mainly because I'm not a JS expert (more of a novice). Does this not overwrite the actual `__uspapi` function with this one?

Reviewer 3: yes it does. but it should only be called/executed if a __usapi function is NOT found in the page. it then serves as a proxy for communicating between iframes

Reviewer 3: not sure the brackets are set correct in the example

While this specification provides the technical means for compliance in cases where CCPA applies, implementations may exist to support deletion requests outside CCPA governance. 

### Relevant Documents

[Limited Service Provider Agreement](https://www.iabprivacy.com/lspa-2019-12.pdf) (12-2-19 version)

## How it Works

Any ad tech company (vendor) supporting the US Privacy framework, exposes a JavaScript resource for each service they offer. The vendor hosts a URL that provides this resource and also serves as a unique identifier for the resource. The URL is made public to a maintained LSPA signatories list and to non-signatories via the vendor's method of choice.

Publishers working with any services provided by these vendors consume the exposed JavaScript and embed it on their properties where consumers can request deletion of their personal data. If data deletion is requested, all vendor javascript on the publisher property is notified. Vendors then respond by deleting the relevant personal data and signaling any affected vendors downstream.

> ### Multiple Services

Reviewer 4: From the blurb above in the CCPA Regulation:

> direct any service providers to delete the consumer's personal information from their records

The relationship is consumer to service **_provider_** not consumer to **_service_**.  So, therefore, no matter how many services a Vendor provides, there is only one request to be made to that Vendor and therefore no need to support multiple services or to even specify that in this technical document.

For vendors that provide multiple services, a URL is provided for each service. A publisher may use any of those services but not necessarily all of them. When a consumer requests data deletion, only the scripts provided on the page will trigger the delete request back to the vendor. Vendors can then delete the personal data, in accordance with their practices, for each service provided on the publisher property where the request originated.

### Deletion

The technical solution detailed in this specification provides the means to signal consumer requests for data deletion. Companies supporting the US Privacy Framework (i.e., service providers) will respond to the signals by deleting the consumer's relevant personal data to the extent required by CCPA. The process for deletion depends on the company's technology and operational practices in place. _How_ a vendor deletes a consumer's personal data is out of scope for this specification.

> ### Non-web Environments

Reviewer 4: "In-App" is correct term here.  "In-App" was created specifically for this use case.  I understand it has a Mobile-only feel but that's only because Mobile is the biggest use case.  If a clarifying statement is needed then add that.

My problem with Non-web is that it then proceeds to tell us to use a web page in the non-web environment.  It sounds like there is no Internet connection or something.

## performDeletion

The publisher, or its CMP where applicable, calls this command based on some user delete action to initiate the deletion process. The command communicates to vendors that a specified user has requested that their personal data be deleted by calling the `performDeletionFunction` registered during the call to `registerDeletion`. 

This command is an update to the existing `__uspapi` function with the following syntax: 

```
__usapi("performDeletion", version, null, identifiers)
```

The callback parameter of the `__uspapi` is not used in this case and can remain null. The `identifiers` parameter is only required when handling non-web deletion requests and is further explained in the following section. 

### Identifying Data to Delete in Non-web Environments

When operating in a non-web environment, data deletion requests are handled by sending the user to a web page where they can complete the request to have their data deleted. Vendors need certain information to correctly identify the data to delete:  the platform name, the unique app identifier used in the app store, and the device identifier for that platform / store. 

> The `performDeletion` command includes a parameter for identifiers. Using the `identifiers` parameter, publishers can pass multiple items, each with the required fields: `platform`, `app_identifier`, and `user_identifier`. These details should be passed from the app context to the delete webpage and then along with the request from the page. Below are a few examples of that information:

Reviewer 4: I don't think it is ever possible to have more than one `platform`, `app_identifier`, or `user_identifier` in a single app.

Reviewer 2: You may need to pass the deletion for multiple apps at the same time?

Reviewer 4: @Facens this software only runs in one App at a time

```
identifiers {
  ...
  "platform": "ios-app-store",
  "app_identifier": "01234567891446075923",
  "user_identifier": "AEA12347583AACD-A123667-A418AABC-AB123806-1242AEAACB12AB1234548606"
}
...
{
  "platform": "android-play-store",
  "app_identifier": "com.acmeinc.acmeapp",
  "user_identifier": "aaaacdda123802ae-11fb191c-1247abad-12340794ad123394ac123912"
...
}
```

```

> Note: For purposes of this explanation, a "bundle id" is used for (iOS) and a "package" for (Android).

Reviewer 4: for which property?

Reviewer: app_identifier I believe @chrispaterson

```

### Common Platform / Stores identifiers

> These identifiers can be used for the "platform" field where applicable. Otherwise, the platform field can include an arbitrary value.

Reviewer 4: How can `platform` contain an arbitrary value?  If a Vendor is meant to interpret this information to be able to identify a user, this can not be arbitrary.

Reviewer 2: We've decided to keep it open in order to support additional platforms that aren't listed (knowing that we can't possibly list them all)

Reviewer 4: @Facens if it's arbitrary it's not usable because this information enables a Vendor script to interpret the other two values.  For example: If I'm a Vendor and I receive a `"platform"` value of `"foo-bar-23"` and it's not a platform I recognize, what do I do?

<table>
  <tr>
   <td>Android Google Play Store
   </td>
   <td>android-play-store
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Android Amazon Store
   </td>
   <td>android-amazon-store
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>iOS App Store
   </td>
   <td>ios-app-store
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Samsung App Store
   </td>
   <td>samsung-app-store
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Huawei app store
   </td>
   <td>huawei-app-store
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Sony apps
   </td>
   <td>sony-app-store
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>LG smartworld
   </td>
   <td>lg-app-store
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Example Implementation

Publisher site setup:

```

> <html>

Reviewer 4: This whole section is WAY too much.  There is already a specification that defines how to set up the `__usapiLocator` frame and stub

        }, i.parameter);
       }
      }
      
      uspapi_addFrame();
      if(!('__uspapi' in window) || 
         (typeof (window['__uspapi']) !== 'function' && 
          typeof (window['__uspapi']) !== 'object' && 
          (typeof (window['__uspapi']) === 'undefined' || 
           window['__uspapi'] !== null)))
      {
       window['__uspapi'] = uspapi_stub;
       window['__uspapi'].msgHandler = uspapi_msghandler;
       if(window.addEventListener)
       {
        window.addEventListener('message', uspapi_msghandler, false);
       }
       else
       {
        window.attachEvent('onmessage', uspapi_msghandler);
       }
      }
    </script>
    <!-- include the vendor deletion scripts into the page: -->
    <script src="https://vendorx.com/ccpa-delete-function.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <button id="ccpa-delete">Delete my personal data</button>
    <script>
      document.getElementById('ccpa-delete').addEventListener('click', function ()
      {
       __uspapi('performDeletion', 1, null);
      }, false);
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Vendor script (at `https://vendorx.com/ccpa-delete-function.js`)

```
// find the __uspapi frame

> if(!('__uspapi' in window)){

Author: @janwinkler did I do this correctly?

Reviewer: Except for possibly my comment below it looks correct to me.

	var f = window;
	var cmpFrame;
	var cmpCallbacks = {};
	while (!cmpFrame) {
	  try {
		if (f.frames['__uspapiLocator']) {
		  cmpFrame = f;
		}
	  } catch (e) {}
	  if (f === window.top) {
		break;
	  }
	  f = f.parent;
	}

	/* Set up a __uspapi function to do the postMessage and
	stash the callback.
	This function behaves (from the caller's perspective)
	identically to the in-frame __uspapi call */
	window.__uspapi = function(cmd, ver, callback, param) {
	  if (!cmpFrame) {
		callback({
		  msg: '__uspapi not found'
		}, false);
		return;
	  }

	  var callId = Math.random() + '';
	  var msg = {
		__uspapiCall: {
		  command: cmd,
		  parameter: param,
		  version: ver,
		  callId: callId
		}
	  };
	  cmpCallbacks[callId] = callback;
	  cmpFrame.postMessage(msg, '*');
	};

	window.addEventListener('message', function(event) {
	  var json = typeof event.data === 'string' ? JSON.parse(event.data) : event.data;
	  if (json.__uspapiReturn) {
		var i = json.__uspapiReturn;
		cmpCallbacks[i.callId](i.returnValue, i.success);
		delete cmpCallbacks[i.callId];
	  }
	}, false);

	function vendorXDeletion() {
	  //... do some deletion work …
	  return;
	}

> 	__uspapi('registerDeletion', 1, vendorXDeletion);

Reviewer: I think this call to `__uspapi` needs to move outside the closing bracket on line 328 right @janwinkler?
